docs(middleware-factory): snippets split, improved, and lint (#1451)
awslabs/aws-lambda-powertools-python: docs/utilities/middleware_factory.md

description: Utility
---

> <!-- markdownlint-disable MD043 -->

Reviewer: This is actually our time to not disable this rule and implement `Getting started` and `Advanced` ;)

Middleware factory provides a decorator factory to create your own middleware to run logic before, and after each Lambda invocation synchronously.

## Key features

* Run logic before, after, and handle exceptions
* Trace each middleware when requested

## Getting started

???+ tip
    All examples shared in this documentation are available within the [project repository](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-lambda-powertools-python/tree/develop/examples){target="_blank"}.

You might need a middleware factory to abstract non-functional code and focus on business logic or even validate the payload before the lambda run, among other cases.

> ## Middleware with no params

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Middleware with no params
```

    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_with_params_function.py"
    ```

=== "getting_started_middleware_with_params_payload.json"

    ```json hl_lines="18 19 20"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_with_params_payload.json"
    ```

## Advanced

For advanced use cases, you can instantiate [Tracer](../core/tracer.md) inside your middleware, and add annotations as well as metadata for additional operational insights.

=== "advanced_middleware_tracer_function.py"
    ```python hl_lines="7 9 12 16 17 19 25 42"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/advanced_middleware_tracer_function.py"
    ```

=== "advanced_middleware_tracer_payload.json"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/advanced_middleware_tracer_payload.json"
    ```

![Middleware advanced Tracer](../media/middleware_factory_tracer_2.png)

### Tracing middleware **execution**

If you are making use of [Tracer](../core/tracer.md), you can trace the execution of your middleware to ease operations.

This makes use of an existing Tracer instance that you may have initialized anywhere in your code.

???+ warning

>     You must enable Active Tracing in your Lambda function when using this feature, otherwise Lambda will not be able to send traces to XRay..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    You must [enable Active Tracing](../core/tracer/#permissions) in your Lambda function when using this feature, otherwise Lambda cannot send traces to XRay.
```

* **event** - Lambda function invocation event
* **context** - Lambda function context object

> ### Creating your own middleware for before logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Middleware with before logic
```

We can shorten this to ease navigation

=== "getting_started_middleware_before_logic_function.py"
    ```python hl_lines="5 23 24 29 30 32 37 38"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_before_logic_function.py"
    ```

=== "getting_started_middleware_before_logic_payload.json"

    ```json hl_lines="9-13"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_before_logic_payload.json"
    ```

> ### Creating your own middleware for after logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Middleware for after logic
```

We can shorten this to ease navigation

=== "getting_started_middleware_after_logic_function.py"
    ```python hl_lines="7 14 15 21-23 37"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_after_logic_function.py"
    ```

=== "getting_started_middleware_after_logic_payload.json"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_after_logic_payload.json"
    ```

## Middleware with params

You can also have your own keyword arguments after the mandatory arguments.

=== "getting_started_middleware_with_params_function.py"
    ```python hl_lines="6 27 28 29 33 49"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_with_params_function.py"
    ```

=== "getting_started_middleware_with_params_payload.json"

    ```json hl_lines="18 19 20"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_with_params_payload.json"
    ```

> ## Tracing middleware execution

Reviewer: This should be under `Advanced`

    ```python hl_lines="8 14 15 36"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_tracer_function.py"
    ```

=== "getting_started_middleware_tracer_payload.json"

    ```json hl_lines="18 19 20"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/getting_started_middleware_tracer_payload.json"
    ```

When executed, your middleware name will [appear in AWS X-Ray Trace details as](../core/tracer.md) `## middleware_name`, in this example the middleware name is `## middleware_with_tracing`.

![Middleware simple Tracer](../media/middleware_factory_tracer_1.png)

## Advanced

For advanced use cases, you can instantiate [Tracer](../core/tracer.md) inside your middleware, and add annotations as well as metadata for additional operational insights.

=== "advanced_middleware_tracer_function.py"
    ```python hl_lines="7 9 12 16 17 19 25 42"
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/advanced_middleware_tracer_function.py"
    ```

=== "advanced_middleware_tracer_payload.json"

    ```json
    --8<-- "examples/middleware_factory/src/advanced_middleware_tracer_payload.json"
    ```

![Middleware avanced Tracer](../media/middleware_factory_tracer_2.png)

> 

Reviewer: Could you create another one `Combining Powertools utilities` section? 

One common use case is for customers to create a single middleware with several Powertools features like Tracer, Logger, Validation, etc.
